---
layout: post
title:  "Some p-adic ping-pong fun"
date:   2025-03-02 19:40:12 -0300
categories: math
hide_header: false
---
I've recently stumbled upon this [blog post][bseminar_post] that I found quite interesting. Somewhat surprisingly (to me, at least), there exists an angle $\theta$, with rational sine and rational cosine, such that the rotations by
$\theta$ around two perpendicular axes in $\mathbb{R}^3$ generate a free group. That is, the group $\Gamma\subset\text{SO}_3(\mathbb{Q})$ generated by the rational matrices

$$
\begin{pmatrix}
\cos(\theta) & -\sin(\theta) & 0\\
\sin(\theta) & \cos(\theta) & 0\\
0 & 0 & 1
\end{pmatrix}
\quad\text{and}\quad
\begin{pmatrix}
1 & 0 & 0\\
0 & \cos(\theta) & -\sin(\theta)\\
0 & \sin(\theta) & \cos(\theta)
\end{pmatrix}$$


is free. Let us illustrate this with a little hypothetical mathematical game. You have a
magical three-dimensional object that can only be rotated back and forth around two fixed
perpendicular axes and by a fixed angle $\theta$. You can scramble this object just like
a Rubik's cube: Apply a sequence of rotations by $\theta$ around the two axes, and your
friend has to put it back in the original position by also applying a sequence of
elementary rotations. And just like a Rubik's cube, there is always a trivial solution:
Your friend can just cheat and closely watch your moves, and then apply exactly the same
rotations you did, but backwards.

The funny part is, you can choose the angle $\theta$ in such a way the trivial solution is
the only one. That is, there is no other sequence of rotations that will bring the object
back to its original position, and any attempt to solve the puzzle cleverly will only
scramble the object further. And after annoying your friend for a while, you can always
annoy them further by giving them a little lecture on the dynamics of some transformations
of the projective line over a p-adic field, which is what we are actually doing here.

See, when $p \cong 1\ \text{mod}\ 4$, the theory of Quadratic Reciprocity tells us that
$1$ has a square root modulo $p$. By Hensel's Lemma, this square root can be lifted to a
square root of $1$ in the $p$-adic field $\mathbb{Q}_p$. In this case, there is a very nice
action of $\text{SO}_3(\mathbb{Q}_p)$ on the projective line $\mathbb{P}^1(\mathbb{Q}_p)$.
To understand this action, let us first understand the symmetries of $\mathbb{P}^1(\mathbb{Q}_p)$.

Just like any projective line, the space $\mathbb{P}^1(\mathbb{Q}_p)$ can be identified
with the set $\mathbb{Q}_p\cup\\{\infty\\}$ of $p$-adic numbers together with a point at
infinity. Then, the symmetries of the projective line are given by the Möbius
transformations

$$x\mapsto\frac{ax+b}{cx+d},\quad a,b,c,d\in\mathbb{Q}_p,\quad ad-bc\neq 0,$$

where $\infty$ is mapped to $\frac{a}{c}$ (which is equal to $\infty$ if $c=0$), and
$\frac{-d}{c}$ is mapped to $\infty$. Usually, it is allowed for the
determinant $ad-bc$ to be any unit in $\mathbb{Q}_p$ (that is, to work in the group
$\text{PGL}_2(\mathbb{Q}_p)$ rather than in $\text{PSL}_2(\mathbb{Q}_p)$), but smaller group
will suffice for our purposes. This is nice because, as it is easy to check, the fixed
points of a Möbius transformation are the equivalence classes of eigenvectors of the matrix
$[[a,b],[c,d]]$, so we know the corresponding eigenvalues are always reciprocals of one another.



[bseminar_post]: https://sbseminar.wordpress.com/2007/09/17/that-trick-where-you-embed-the-free-group-into-a-lie-group/