---
layout: post
title:  "Reading journal 1 - Flowers for Algernon"
date:   2025-07-29 19:58:12 -0300
categories: books
hide_header: false
---
Lately I’ve been trying to replace my YouTube watching habit with ‘better’ ways to entertain myself. And by ‘better’ I mostly just mean something that can help me slow down. As much as I love falling into rabbit holes and spending hours watching videos about 18th century American cuisine or about infamous airline incidents I ultimately think my brain feels much better after spending two hours reading a book than after watching a dozen 10 minute videos. Being thrown from one side of the world to the other by the algorithm just makes me feel so agitated and unfocussed. And let’s not even get into my Instagram and Reddit scrolling habit.

I was venting to a friend about this and other ways my poor habits have been hurting my mental health when she got up, walked to her neatly organized bookshelf and pulled out a copy of Flowers for Algernon by Daniel Keyes. “Read this”, she said. I vaguely remembered its title from somewhere (it turns out I was thinking about that pretty funny episode of Always Sunny based on it) but I didn’t know anything about it. I just finished and I’m feeling all sorts of ways about it so I decided to write some things down. It was a really unique experience to go into this book completely blind so I’ll begin by saying that this was a wonderful read and that you should definitely go look for a copy immediately.

The book is written in first person and narrated by Charlie Gordon, an intellectually disabled man who is selected to undergo an experimental surgery aiming to increase his intelligence. From the first few pages you can’t help but feel deep empathy for Charlie. Even with a limited understanding of the world around him he is not oblivious to the fact that people treat him as if he was fundamentally different from them. People are kind to him, or so he thinks, but he wants more. Charlie wants to become like other people.

He attends classes at a center for intellectually challenged adults where his teacher, Miss Alice Kinnian, is struck by his drive and motivation to learn. He might not be the most capable student in his class but he is the most determined to improve himself, and these qualities are what end up getting recommended for the procedure. Two researchers, Dr. Strauss and Professor Nemur, have been able to significantly increase the intelligence of a lab rat called Algernon. In stereotypical 1960s unethical science fashion, they decide that a single successful attempt on a rodent is enough to move on to a human trial, on a human that clearly is not capable of informed consent. Like most people in Charlie’s life, they simply don’t see him as truly human.

Keys illustrates the rapid changes in Charlie’s intellect very effectively. On one page, he is easily outperformed by Algernon in simple games and tests, and a few pages later he is embarrassed by how simple minded he used to be. Charlie quickly becomes a genius, tragically as distant intellectually to most people as he was before, but now in the opposite direction. His mind is inundated by memories of his traumatic past, as he struggles to process the events that shaped him. He hates how his newfound intelligence changed the way people tread him. People who proudly mocked and took advantage of him grow ashamed, since their acts retrospectively become more grave now that their victim is no longer subhuman. Nemur speaks of him as his own creation, as if Charlie’s personhood is a byproduct of the surgery.

Flowers for Algernon is an emotional rollercoaster. I don’t remember when was the last time I cried while reading, but the last few pages of this book had me leaning back from the table to avoid soaking a borrowed book with tears.